---
title: Entity Framework - Entity Framework Core - Query data - Database functions
published: true
date: 2024-08-09 08:30:40
tags: Summary, EFCore
description: Database functions can be invoked using EF Core query translation.
image:
---

## In this article

Database functions can be invoked using EF Core query translation.

- A C# method may not have an equivalent database function.

  - ```String.IsNullOrEmpty``` method translates to a null check and a comparison with an empty string in the database rather than a function.

  - ```String.Equals(String, StringComparison)``` method doesn't have database equivalent since string comparison can't be represented or mimicked easily in a database.

- A database function may not have an equivalent C# method. The ?? operator in C#, which doesn't have any method, translates to the ```COALESCE``` function in the database.

## Types of database functions

EF Core SQL generation supports a variety of database functions.

### Built-in vs user-defined functions

EF Core defines built-in functions and user-defined functions.

### Aggregate vs scalar vs table-valued functions

- Scalar functions take scalar values - like integers or strings - as parameters and return a scalar value as the result. Scalar functions can be used anywhere in SQL where a scalar value can be passed.

- Aggregate functions take a stream of scalar values as parameters and return a scalar value as the result. Aggregate functions are applied on the whole query result set or on a group of values generated by applying ```GROUP BY``` operator.

- Table-valued functions take scalar values as parameter(s) and return a stream of rows as the result. Table-valued functions are used as a table source in ```FROM``` clause.

### Niladic functions

Niladic functions are special database functions that don't have any parameters and must be invoked without parenthesis.

## Database function mappings in EF Core

EF Core supports three different ways of mapping between C# functions and database functions.

### Built-in function mapping

In this article we will look at how to provide translations over primitive types in the EF Core.

### ```EF.Functions``` mapping

Is it possible to invoke a database function in a translated query?

### User-defined function mapping

EF Core provides a variety of mappings for querying the database.

## See also

- SqlServer built-in function mappings

- Sqlite built-in function mappings

- Azure Cosmos DB built-in function mappings

Ref: [Database Functions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/querying/database-functions)