---
title: Servers - IIS - HTTP/2
published: true
date: 2024-09-11 03:34:53
tags: Summary, AspNetCore
description: By Justin Kotalik
image:
---
- Article

  - 07/31/2024

  - 5 contributors

## In this article

By Justin Kotalik

 ```HTTP/2``` is supported with ASP.NET Core in the following IIS deployment scenarios:

- Windows Server 2016 or later / Windows 10 or later

- IIS 10 or later

- TLS 1.2 or later connection

- When hosting out-of-process: Public-facing edge server connections use ```HTTP/2```, but the reverse proxy connection to the Kestrel server uses ```HTTP/1.1```.

For an in-process deployment when an ```HTTP/2``` connection is established, ```HttpRequest.Protocol``` reports ```HTTP/2```. For an out-of-process deployment when an ```HTTP/2``` connection is established, ```HttpRequest.Protocol``` reports ```HTTP/1.1```.

For more information on the in-process and out-of-process hosting models, see ASP.NET Core Module (ANCM) for IIS.

 ```HTTP/2``` is enabled by default for HTTPS/TLS connections. Connections fall back to ```HTTP/1.1``` if an ```HTTP/2``` connection isn't established. For more information on ```HTTP/2``` configuration with IIS deployments, see ```HTTP/2``` on IIS.

## Advanced ```HTTP/2``` features to support gRPC

Additional ```HTTP/2``` features in IIS support gRPC, including support for response trailers and sending reset frames.

Requirements to run gRPC on IIS:

- In-process hosting.

- Windows 11 Build 22000 or later, Windows Server 2022 Build 20348 or later.

- TLS 1.2 or later connection.

### Trailers

HTTP Trailers are similar to HTTP Headers, except they are sent after the response body is sent. For IIS and HTTP.sys, only ```HTTP/2``` response trailers are supported.

```csharp
if (httpContext.Response.SupportsTrailers())
{
    httpContext.Response.DeclareTrailer("trailername");	

    // Write body
    httpContext.Response.WriteAsync("Hello world");

    httpContext.Response.AppendTrailer("trailername", "TrailerValue");
}
```

In the preceding example code:

- ```SupportsTrailers``` ensures that trailers are supported for the response.

- ```DeclareTrailer``` adds the given trailer name to the ```Trailer``` response header. Declaring a response's trailers is optional, but recommended. If ```DeclareTrailer``` is called, it must be before the response headers are sent.

- ```AppendTrailer``` appends the trailer.

### ```Reset```

 ```Reset``` allows for the server to reset a ```HTTP/2``` request with a specified error code. A reset request is considered aborted.

```csharp
var resetFeature = httpContext.Features.Get<IHttpResetFeature>();
resetFeature.Reset(errorCode: 2);
```

 ```Reset``` in the preceding code example specifies the ```INTERNAL_ERROR``` error code. For more information about ```HTTP/2``` error codes, visit the ```HTTP/2``` specification error code section.

Ref: [Use ASP.NET Core with ```HTTP/2``` on IIS](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/host-and-deploy/iis/protocols?view=aspnetcore-8.0)